Okay fabulous,
that's a little bonus CodePen for you.
Okay, so the next thing that I wanna work
on here inside of the CodePen, we're just
gonna continue on with the same pen, we're
going to work on creating a type scale.
This is something that I did
in the advanced CSS course.
If you open up another browser tab,
we're gonna go to type-scale.com,
or I guess typescale, all one word,
.com, that works too.
And this is basically a tool for
setting up really good looking type.
Now, I am not a graphic designer.
Do we have any graphic
designers in the room today?
One graphic designer,
two graphic designers, awesome.
Maybe we have a few graphic
designers there online, but
many of us are challenged by type.
How do we pick the right sizes?
And how do we make them
all look proportional?
Well, this is a really cool way of
doing it is through a Type Scale.
And this is done through math.
So, now, we can work with calc as well,
inside of CSS.
So as you see here at the top, this
has got a base font size that's set to
16 pixels, which is what we're
going to start with here.
And then,
there is a scale in this drop down.
And so, this is a relative unit of measure
between one type size and another.
So we could go to, let's say,
an augmented fourth.
Those of you who are trained in music
theory will notice that these names match
some really cool music
theory types of things.
So, this is going to basically
scale each of these sizes of type
from very small to very large, by 1.414.
Why?
Because the type people
say this is what's pretty.
Here's the major third or
a minor third, okay?
So, you can see how these
kind of scale together and
they look proportional and pretty.
So we can set this up to borrow this and
use it inside of our design as well.
And the way to do this,
I'm going to set this to the major third.
And it just so happens to be that this
is set to Poppins, is our font-family.
This is the same Poppins believe it or
not that we're going to use in our design.
And so, this is all done and
set and ready to go.
And then,
if you pull over from the side here,
this will show you what this looks like,
okay?
Looks good.
And then,
we can copy this over to our CodePen.
You can see here that it's giving you
the sizes, both in rems and in pixels.
So, we are going to kind
of borrow some of this.
You can either click on
the Edit on CodePen button,
this will open up a whole new CodePen for
you with everything there, or
you can grab the CSS which
is down here at the bottom.
And I'm just gonna grab
the CSS that's here.
Copy that.
And I am going to paste this
into my CodePen right here.
So, our font-family is set to
Poppins kind of San Serif.
So this looks like Arial
that's here on the screen.
That is because Ariel is
the default font here.
That's what's going on, all right?
Now, let us make some changes to this, and
we'll show you how the scaling can work.
All right, so, this has started
with our body background of white,
we don't need that,
you can get rid of that.
The color of black, we don't need that,
The paragraph, the margin on
the bottom of 1rem, we don't need that,
you can get rid of that.
And then, it's going to set up a generic
style for us for headings 1 through 5,
and it's set it up with margins and
all the rest of that, that is great.
And then, here,
we have our series of font sizes, okay?
What we're gonna do is we're gonna write a
little bit of code here with variables and
with scaling, so that we can have
a flexible series of numbers.
Right now, we're locked into what
the Type Scale has given us but
we can write this such that it
will calculate this for us.
So, let's go through that process now.
I'm gonna scroll back in
my CSS up to the root and
we can set up a variable called base-size,
okay?
Base-size.
And we're at root, so we can call it 1rem,
which will be 16 pixels, okay?
So, that's our base-size.
We can also set up an item
we'll call it scale.
So this is the number that comes from
that drop down where we had major third,
minor third, augmented fourth,
all those numbers.
What is the scale?
This is going to be 1.25.
That's our number, okay?
And then what we'll do,
is we can set up a series of items here.
So, if our paragraphs and our body and
such, let's go here to our body.
We can say our font size will be what?
var(--base-size).
We could set that on the body tag.
Very non-specific,
we're setting the base font size
to 16 pixels, which it already is.
You won't see any changing or
anything like that.
From here, we can scale forward,
so let's take a look at that.
We're gonna start down here with h5.
h5, currently says it's set to 1.25rem.
How did we get to 1.25rem?
Anybody know?
>> Base-size times scale.
>> Base size times the scale gave us 1.25,
makes sense?
So, let's just write that.
So our font size is gonna wind up being
our var, actually, we'll do a calc.
Calc is the way that we do math in CSS,
if that's new to you.
Calc with parentheses.
We can do addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division, that's all.
So no exponents, no funny stuff,
just basic arithmetic, okay?
So, calc is what we need here.
And we are going to then
set this up with our
two variables, var(--base-size) and
we can multiply that by var(---scale).
And absolutely nothing
changes on the page, right?
So far so good?
Okay, so now if we go to our h4,
it's 1.563.
What is this?
What is the math behind that?
A little bit more difficult.
Yes.
>> h5 times the scale.
>> It's basically the h5 times the scale,
right?
Except we can't grab that h5, right?
Can't grab that h5, cuz we've set it
to our CSS selector of h5, didn't we?
Okay, so let's borrow that.
Let's take that right there,
the value of font size, and
let's go back up to our variables.
So now we can set up a variable,
we'll call it h5, and
we'll give it that value, yeah?
So, now, if I set up a variable
called h4 what is this going to be?
>> h5 times scale.
So, calc(var(--h5) *
var(--scale).
Now, it would be nice if we could just
say, base-size times scale squared.
That would be really, really awesome.
But we have to do it this way because CSS
calc doesn't handle exponents, right?
And 1.25 times or
I'm sorry, 1.25 times two
is not the same thing as 1.25 times 1.25,
makes sense?
That is often a question I get.
We'll just say two, 1.25s.
No they're squared, [LAUGH], all right?
So type along with me, we're gonna
set up a whole bunch of
these as you can imagine.
We're gonna go to h3, h2, and h1.
So, h4, h3, h2, And h1.
Okay, so for my h3,
what is its calculation?
>> h4 times scale.
Okay, for h2, what is its calculation?
>> h3 times scale.
And for h1 what is our calculation?
>> h2 times scale
>> h2 times scale.
Nice?
Cool little math here,
so you see what happens?
Now, if we decide to change our base
font size, the boss comes to us and
says everything needs to come up by
a little bit, we change one variable.
How cool is that?
Yeah, right?
The other cool thing, of course,
with CSS variables is we can change
their value across media queries.
So, if you wanna change all of your
font sizes, when we go in a media query,
you wanna make everything slightly bigger
for mobile, or smaller for mobile,
or whatever.
All we have to do is
change our base font size.
Or we can change our scale or both.
Pretty awesome.
So this is something you may wanna do
on all of your production websites.
We've set these up with headings in mind.
You can, of course, set them up with
all kinds of other things as well,
other various points in time.
And of course, this also solves
the problem that a lot of people have.
For accessibility purposes, we always
want our headings to go in order,
h1, h2, h3, right?
But sometimes the designers want
the h2 to look like an h4, don't they?
This is gonna allow us
to make that happen.
So we can keep the semantics
of our HTML but
make it look however we want it to look.
>> Does order matter when you're
declaring variables in your root?
>> If it works like CSS, so
you can build these on top of each other.
>> So if you were to put h1 at the top and
then try to reference it down further?
>> It'll all calculate, yeah.
All right, so guess what the next
thing we have to do now in our CSS,
when we get down here to our h1,
h2, h3, h4, and h5?
What do we do now?
>> Set the font sizes to those variables.
>> Set the font sizes to those variables,
exactly.
So, our font size will become var(--h1).
Var(--h2).
And so on and so forth, right?
I'm going ahead and type all those in.
Change our math down here
when we get to our h5,
var( --h5), Okay?
Now, let's look at this last
one down here at the bottom.
For the HTML element called small, and for
a class of text_small,
this is set to a font size of 0.8rem
So instead of just going from our base
font size and making things bigger as we
do with headings, now we're going from our
base font size and making things smaller.
So, what is the math
to get us to a 0.8rem?
>> Divided by the scale.
>> Exactly, divided by the scale.
So, we can set that up as a series
of variables if you want.
Or if you just have one
of them as we do here,
then we can just set this up to be calc.
And then,
we'll say var(--base-size), right?
Divided by var(--scale)).
How cool is that?
Worth the price of admission?
Sweet.